Most people install Hermes and use it
like a smarter chat GPT. They wire up
Telegram, point it at a model, type a
request, get a response back, and then
close the window. And if that's how
you're using it, you're missing most of
what Hermes actually can do. So, in this
video, I'm going to show you 10 Hermes
agent features most people are not
using. But, I'm setting one rule. I'm
not going to open a terminal window and
run a bunch of commands. I'm going to
use Hermes from inside Telegram, and I'm
going to ask Hermes to show me what
Hermes can do, because that's the actual
point. Hermes is not just a terminal
chatbot. It's an agent layer that can
remember your operating context, search
old sessions, load workflows, schedule
tasks, run across different platforms,
and behave more like infrastructure than
a normal chat app. Here's the mistake
most people make. They compare Hermes to
Claude Code or Cursor or a normal AI
coding assistant. And if that is the
comparison, you miss the interesting
part. Claude Code is great at coding.
Hermes is interesting because it is
built around the rest of the operating
system for agents. It has memory,
skills, sessions, scheduling, messaging
platforms, sub agents, profiles, tools.
It's not just a ask model, get answer.
It's more like, what if my AI assistant
had a persistent workspace, remembered
how I work, could run jobs while I
sleep, could find old contexts, and
could be reached out to through
Telegram. That is the version of Hermes
most people never get to. So, let's go
through the 10 features I think actually
matter. Feature one is soul.md
and personality. Hermes can have a
persistent operating style, not just a
one-off system prompt. So, for this one,
I asked it explain soul.md and
personality in Hermes. And here's what
it told me, most people don't actually
want a chatbot, they want their
assistant with a stable operating
system. If you keep retyping the same
prompt over and over, one forgotten
instruction and the model drifts back
into default chatbot mode. Soul and
personality are Hermes' answer to a very
real problem. That is the file that
defines who the agent is, how it should
behave,
what tone it should use and what rules
it should follow. And Hermes also has
personality controls, so you can switch
or shape the assistant's behavior
depending on the session. The reason
this matters is very simple, a serious
assistant should not need the same role
primer every single time. If you know
you want the agent to think, speak,
refuse, prioritize,
and help, write it once, then stop
wasting your first prompt on the
identity setup of a prompt.
This is the difference between a generic
model and an assistant that actually has
an operating style. Feature two is
session search. Hermes can search past
conversations when you say, we talked
about this before. Here's what I told
it, search our past sessions for the
Hermes agent features article or vidIQ
research, summarize what we learned,
what performed well, and how it should
shape this YouTube video. And just like
that, here's our past session. Here's
what they say and how I'd use it for
this Hermes agent video. And it went
ahead and summarized it with key point
one, two, three, the list goes on and on
and on and then he goes into his
analysis and his suggestions. This is
the feature that saves you from
repeating yourself. Every serious
operator has this problem. You discuss
something last week, you made a
decision, you found the right workflow,
then a week later you need it again, but
now it's buried in some random chat
thread. Hermes has session search. It
can search previous sessions, summarize
what happened, and bring the relevant
context back into the current
conversation.
That is exactly what happened for this
video. I posted an article yesterday
called 15 Hermes agent features you've
never touched. It did well on X, so
instead of me manually explaining that
to Hermes again, I can ask it to search
the prior context and use that to shape
our script. This is where Hermes starts
feeling less like a chatbot and more
like a an employee, a collaborator.
Because it can recover the actual trail
of decisions that we make together. This
does not mean Hermes magically knows
every detail from every old
conversation.
>> [snorts]
>> It means it can search stored sessions
and summarize the relevant parts. That
distinction matters. We move on to
feature three, skills as workflows.
Hermes can load reusable workflows as
skills instead of making you rewrite
complex prompts every single time.
So for this, I told it show me the
skills you have available. And here they
all are, the main categories and some of
the skills that it pulled up, things
like Nova YouTube agent, which is my
YouTube agent, the one I've covered in a
previous video of mine. Sage X, my X
agent, I've also covered this. And by
the way, both of these are open sourced.
I've open sourced them.
You can find them on my previous videos
if those are things you're interested
in.
Skills are probably the biggest unlock
in Hermes. Uh skill is basically a
reusable playbook. Instead of telling
your agent the same process every single
time, you turn that process into a
skill. For example, I have skills for
YouTube research, X trend scouting,
Polymarket workflows, code review,
debugging, GitHub, and a lot more. So,
instead of saying, "Please act like a
YouTube strategist, check my channel
context, use VidIQ, avoid rejected
ideas, yada yada yada," I can just load
the Nova YouTube skill. That skill
already knows the workflow. That is how
you turn Hermes from a general assistant
into your actual operating system. Most
people use prompts. Serious users build
skills.
And the important part is not just that
Hermes ships with skills.
The important part is that it literally
helps you create its own skills. If you
do something more than twice, it will
most likely generate a skill for you
itself. This is how a Hermes agent gets
better at its actual work, not just
generally better at just answering
questions. And feature number four,
Telegram gateway as a control surface.
Hermes can run from Telegram with access
to real tools, not just a chatbot. I
asked it, "Explain what makes Hermes in
Telegram different from a normal
Telegram chatbot. Focus on tools,
memory, files,
scheduled jobs, and workflows." And
here's what it said. Number one, tools,
not just replies. Two, it has persistent
memory. Three, it has a file system
access. Four, it can schedule jobs from
Telegram. Five, workflows and skills.
Six, cross-session continuity. It just
went on and on and on. And seven,
Telegram is only one gateway where you
can run every single thing on it, but
you can also run it across different
platforms, if you wish, for some reason,
which I wouldn't really recommend. But
this is the one most people
misunderstand. The important part is not
that Hermes can reply in Telegram. Any
chatbot can reply in Telegram.
The important part is that the Telegram
version of Hermes still has the agent
behind it. It can use tools. It can
access memory. Can search sessions. It
can read files. I mean, it can manage
scheduled jobs, load up skills, help
build me a script, check local context,
and summarize some of the prior
decisions without me leaving that
Telegram chat. That makes Telegram a
control surface, not just a chat app.
For me, this matters because I do not
always want to sit at a computer to
operate an agent. Sometimes I'm outside
on a walk. Sometimes I'm in the gym. I
want to send a voice note. Sometimes I
want to drop a thought on a topic.
Sometimes I want an agent to send me
opportunities while I'm outside of my
house. Hermes living in Telegram makes
that possible. Something I really like
about Telegram is also your ability to
generate topics, to create Telegram
topics, which I've also covered, if
you're interested in that video.
Telegram is not the magic part. Hermes
is the magic part. Telegram is just the
interface. We move on to feature five,
cron jobs. Hermes can do recurring work
without you manually prompting it. So I
asked it, "Show me my active scheduled
jobs." And here you go. It listed both
of my currently active crons, which are
number one, my daily AI brief, and
number two, my Sage X daily opportunity
ping, where it runs Sage X to scout
fresh X reaction opportunities for me
using the Sage X skill that we've built
together. This is where Hermes stops
being reactive. A normal chatbot waits
for you to ask a question. Hermes can
run scheduled jobs. Every morning, every
hour, every Friday, whatever you want.
And the output can go back to Telegram
or another delivery service. This is how
you build the actual automation. Not
just write me a summary, more like every
morning, check the top AI news, find the
ones relevant to my content strategy,
and send me the best opportunities. Or,
every day, scan for reaction
opportunities and send them to a
specific Telegram topic. That is a
completely different category of agent.
It does not wait for you to remember. It
runs the workflow. If you're an
operator, cron jobs are where Hermes
starts making money or saving time while
you're not watching. And now, onto
feature number six, sub agents, one of
my favorite. Hermes can delegate work to
isolated agents and only bring back the
final summary. I asked that you sub
agent to help with this very video that
we're filming. One sub agent should
verify Hermes feature accuracy from
local docs. One should inspect Nova's
memory and voice examples. And one
should summarize the X article angle.
Return only the final combined summary.
And it literally delegated tasks. And it
gave me everything when it was done.
A little too much information for my
liking.
Sub agents are how Hermes avoids turning
one conversation into a giant pile of
context. Instead of one agent doing
everything sequentially, having to wait
for itself to finish a job and then
doing another one and another one and
another one, if it can perform all those
different tasks simultaneously, it will
spawn focused sub agents. Each sub agent
gets its own context and tool access.
One can research docs. For example, one
can inspect local memory, then only the
final summary comes back. This matters
because real work is rarely one clean
task. The key is that sub agents don't
automatically know everything in the
parent conversation. You have to pass
them the context they need, or rather
Hermes has to pass them the context they
need.
That is why this prompt is specific. I'm
telling Hermes exactly what to give each
uh sub agent. Most people think the
agent has to do everything in one
thread. It doesn't. That's the whole
point. Feature number seven, profiles.
Hermes can run multiple isolated agent
identities with separate configurations,
memories, sessions, skills, and entire
different cron jobs as well.
Here I asked it explain Hermes profiles
for an operator running multiple agents.
And it said Hermes profiles are
basically separate workspaces for
separate agents. Think, for example, you
have multiple consistent agents. Each
one of them can have a separate profile,
a separate identity, memories, context,
uh cron jobs that they have scheduled
for each and every single one. So, I
could end up talking to my main Hermes
agent, which is called Hermie, and he
can sound completely different because
he has a different identity from someone
like my YouTube agent, for example. So,
you can end up having essentially one
agent for personal work, one for coding,
one for research, one for content, one
for operations, which happens to be my
setup. That is useful because not every
agent should know the same exact things.
Your coding agent doesn't need to know
your content calendar, your content
agent doesn't need to know your
production credentials. That's probably
a good idea so that, you know, he
doesn't end up tweeting them. Your
research agent doesn't need your
family's context and your lifelong
childhood story. Ask me how I know that.
Profile separate Hermie's state. They
are not a a file-safe security sandbox,
so don't confuse separate profiles with
this agent is technically blocked from
seeing everything, but as an operating
model, profiles are huge. This is how
you go from one messy assistant to an
actual team of agents. Let's move on to
feature number eight, model and provider
switching. Hermie's is provider
agnostic. So, the agent is not locked to
one single model provider. Here, it said
Hermie separates two things that most AI
apps bundle together. It separates the
agent system from the model/provider
used to think. In plain English, ChatGPT
uses OpenAI, Claude uses Anthropic.
Hermie's is different. Hermie's can talk
to many providers at once, by the way.
You could have open router, Anthropic,
OpenAI, new Google Gemini. You can have
all different model providers, AI
models, incorporated inside one Hermie's
agent. This is one of the reasons I
think Hermes is strategically
interesting. It's not just built around
one model. You can use any model. You
can use local models or other providers
depending on your setup. That means the
agent layer and the model layer are
completely separate. If one model is
better for coding, you can use that,
which is what I do is if another is
cheaper for research
and better for research, you can use
that. So on and so forth. So you can
choose different models for different
tasks, which is what I recommend if you
want to go all out and have the best
output that anyone can imagine. Because
in real workflows, the model is not the
whole system. The model is just the
brain you plug into the system. Hermes
is that layer around it. Obviously, this
depends on what providers you actually
have configured. Hermes supports the
routing and doesn't magically give you
every model for free.
Moving on to feature number nine and one
of my personal favorites,
btw.  by the way.
Hermes has a side question mode, so you
can ask something without derailing the
main task. And I happen to use this a
lot because
as you can imagine, I give it big tasks
to handle and then in between I sort of
want to ask it something quick without
it stopping what it's doing, which is
where you can use  btw command in
Hermes.
And there you go. It just said it. Use
this command when you want to ask
something adjacent without derailing the
main agent run.
It's a short side thread for a quick
question, but it does not interrupt or
contaminate the main task context. And
yeah, I know this one is small, but it
is exactly the kind of feature people
miss. You're deep inside a workflow, the
agent has context, maybe it's writing a
script, maybe it's debugging something,
and then you happen to have a side
question. Most people do one of two bad
things. They either interrupt the
current task, or they open a brand new
chat and lose all the useful context
that it happens to have. The slash by
the way command is designed for that
little side question exactly. It lets
you ask something without polluting or
derailing the main thread. For
operators, that matters because real
work is messy. You're constantly
thinking of side questions, but not
every side question deserves to redirect
the whole entire agent. This is the
agent equivalent of saying,
"Quick question,
but don't stop what you're doing." All
right? And the last feature, feature
number 10, hooks, boot.md, and event
automation. Hermes can run custom
automations at life cycle events,
including startup workflows.
Let me show you what I mean, because I
just said a bunch of technical jargon.
Explain Hermes hooks and boot.md with
one concrete example. Hermes hooks are
exactly this: when X happens, run Y. So,
you can create trigger events. In plain
English, they're little automation
triggers around the Hermes gateway life
cycle.
So, say for example, an operator uses
Hermes for Telegram operations and has
scheduled jobs for daily AI
uh news briefs. Every time the gateway
restarts, Hermes automatically does a
health check. Did the gateway come back
cleanly? Did any jobs fail overnight?
And you could also use hooks to trigger
automations based on events. For
example,
um
research X trending news. And if you see
one of those trending news happen to be
something I'm interested in or you know
I'm interested in, then trigger this
automation, which is briefing me on
this. I hope this makes sense. I'm
starting to speak and say a lot of
technical words. So, do let me know if
that makes sense.
This is the feature that makes Hermes
feel less like an app and more like
infrastructure because Hermes has hooks.
That means custom code can run at
certain life cycle points. And Hermes
also has boot.md pattern. If you create
a startup checklist, Hermes can run it
when the gateway starts.
That could be check whether cron jobs
failed overnight, check gateway logs for
error, summarize anything that could
need my attention. Otherwise, stay
silent. That is a very different kind of
assistant. It's not waiting for you to
ask, "Is everything okay?" It can check
the system when it starts and tell you
if something needs attention. This is
not a no-code Zapier clone. Hooks are
custom automations, but that's why
they're powerful. You can wire Hermes
into the life cycle of the agent itself.
Most people think of agents as chat.
Hooks are when agents start becoming
infrastructure.
So, these are the 10 features I think
most people miss. Not because they're
hidden, because most people never move
past the first layer. They install
Hermes, they connect Telegram, they ask
it questions, and then they stop there.
But, the real system is much bigger.
soul.md means the agent has persistent
operating style. Session search means it
can recover old decisions. Skills mean
your workflows become reusable. Telegram
means your phone becomes the control
surface. Crons mean it can work while
you're gone, while you're offline.
Subagents mean it can split complicated
work. Profiles mean you can run
different agents for different jobs.
Model switching means you're not locked
into one single provider. The slash by
the way command means side questions do
not derail the main workflow. And hooks
mean Hermes can respond to life cycle
events like real infrastructure. And
that's the point. The tool was not under
delivering. Most people just never gave
it the operating system it was waiting
for.
If you want the next video, I'll do the
full operator setup, not the basic
installation, because I already have
that video up on my channel, but the
actual setup. Telegram topics, soul.md,
skills, cron jobs, profiles, and how I
would structure Hermes if I was building
it from zero today. And subscribe if you
would like more videos like this. I have
a ton more on my channel. Feel free to
go check them out, and I'll see you in
the next video.